Design systems, I mean,
they're brilliant anyway.
They're useful to have.
If you're working on any project for
any length of time,
having a design system
is definitely worth it.
But if you are working on a product,
an app,
whether you have a web app or
such, whatever you wanna call it,
having a design system I would
argue is almost essential to
enabling you to produce consistent
high quality interactions,
but also just to making your life easier.
So what is a design system?
Why do we care?
What goes into them?
Well, basically, a design system is to set
a guideline, standards, and components
that unify your design and development
efforts across the organization.
So it brings together design and
development.
I see it as a kind of blueprint for
design and developments, collaboration.
It's a shared point of interaction
with them that can streamline
building of digital projects
products significantly.
It's really worth the investment.
So why do I consider a design system so
important and why should you create one?
Well, consistency is a huge part of it.
Ensuring that your design is uniform,
the functionality behaves in the same way,
just enhances the user experience.
And to be honest Brandon,
identity as well.
I always think about the BBC
when I think of this cuz they
have something called the global
experience language, right?
Which is their design system.
And the BBC is a fascinating
organization because it's trying to
appeal to such a broad range of people,
right?
And so the thought of having one
design system that kind of underpins
all of it feels a bit counterintuitive
in some ways because it's like,
one minute you're on a website
aimed at toddlers, right?
And the next minute you're on the Radio
4 website, which is aimed at old people.
And then you're on the BBC Sports site,
which is aimed at rugby people or
whatever else.
And so
there are all these different audiences.
Yet you could easily be
moving between these sites.
So as a parent,
you might be going on to CBBs, right?
And then be BBC News and
then radio two, whatever.
So it's like they've all got to
have their own visual identity.
Yeah, if they work consistently that's
gonna make my life a lot easier as a user
moving between the sites.
And so they've done this really
clever thing where all of
the functionality is totally consistent,
right?
A carousel looks is a carousel
works in the same way, same layout,
same everything on every site, but
it's styled with color typography,
rounded corners that kind of stuff
differently for the different sites.
So it creates consistency
without uniformity,
without forcing the same
brand identity on everything.
So it's very valuable
from that point of view.
Then there's efficiency and speed.
Really, this is big as well,
because this will seriously,
if you get this right, you'll be able
to turn around prototype super quick.
And then those prototypes will be
able to go into production and
turned into working
code much much quicker.
Because there'll be a whole level of
kind of code that just doesn't need
recreating the HTML, the CSS,
the JavaScript, maybe even some of
the database site connection stuff
that's going on won't need coding.
Once you've done one, I dont't know,
news component that pulls back news
stories, you've done them all, basically.
It just makes the whole process so
much easier.
It also encourages collaboration.
It improves teamwork,
creating a shared language and
a shared set of resources
between development and design,
which can be a bit of a fractious
relationship sometimes.
So totally worth doing from that point
of view ensures quality as well cuz each
of those components, when you drop in that
component, you know that that component
has been designed once properly with best
practice in terms of user experience.
In terms of maybe accessibility, all of
those kinds of things are baked into it,
responsiveness is baked into it.
And it obviously has a cost reduction.
You cut your cost by reducing the need
to rework or duplicate effort, freeing
resources for innovation rather than just
reinventing the wheel the whole time.
Flipping brilliant,
I love designing systems, right?
So if any of you actually got
to build a design system before?
No, yeah, it's frustrating.
You've done some with prototyping,
you've done a little bit?
>> We're trying.
>> You're trying at the minute
done a little bit, right?
Okay, so what am trying to do is
share with you the kinda basic
principles more from the design side.
I'm not gonna pretend I understand
the code side, all right?
I briefly touch on that later, but
I do wanna primarily look at it
from a design point of view.
Let's talk about the basic building
blocks that go into a design system.
So you've decided you wanna build
a design system, where do you begin?
Now, first of all, I will say that
Steve that I mentioned earlier,
it has created a second course
on design systems that will go
into a lot more of
the practicalities of doing this.
And I'm gonna look kind of holistically
at the top level of it and
he goes into a lot more details.
So I'd recommend checking that one out.
As another guy called Ben, who has got
a course on enterprise design system
management, which I suspect looks at
it more from the developers side of
things and
the management of design systems.
You might want to check
that one out as well.
So my role here is to
kind of look top level,
holistically at it,
if that sounds pretentious enough, right?
So let's look at the basic building
blocks that go into a design system.
So there are fundamentally three, right?
There are styles, right?
By the way,
I'm gonna use some terminology here,
that the terminology argues,
everybody uses different things.
So for example,
Brad Frost who is awesome guy, and
he wrote an amazing book called atomic
design, which is around design systems.
He talks about molecules and atoms and
things like that and
he's far cleverer than me,
his way of thinking about it does my idea,
right?
So I've got some kind of simplified
version of it for today.
So the first one is styles,
styles covers things like typography,
color layout, the basic kind of
foundational stuff in a design, right?
So that's your absolute basics, okay?
So thinking about it from
a Figma point of view,
it's all stuff you set in the styles menu,
basically.
Then up from that, there are elements.
Elements are your buttons, your forms,
those kind of basic
building blocks of HTML.
So if you think about HTML,
other than the basic ones
you have within HTML, P tags,
H tags, Italic strong,
those kinds of typographic ones,
they would be styles.
But then alongside those, you have a whole
load of elements like input elements,
radio buttons, checkboxes,
those kinds of elements,
they would be elements in a design system,
right?
And then those come together you see are
multiple elements that make up components,
right?
So components are bigger
things like modals, Carousels,
menus, and they're made up of
multiple elements together.
Does that make sense?
I think that feels fairly logical,
especially if you come from
a development background.
Now, you could get even more complicated,
and you could say, well, you could have
components within components, and
they are thing in their own right.
So for example, a header, we might
have a navigation component in it and
a search component in it, so
is that a thing in its own right?
But no, I would just say that's
a component within a component.
Because primarily,
that's how Figma organizes it, right?
That you can have nested
components in Figma, so
that I kinda stick with
the same kinda wording.